Explanation for the all the car programs
Jonathan Chang

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Car.java - implementation explanation of source file

This was the simplest part to implement. The class includes all parts
of the car (VIN, make, model, price, mileage, color) which can be set from
values in the cars.txt file or from user input through get/set functions
per value. Each is O(1) since each variable ties directly to its specific
car. The toString overwrites so it can be output to our main program
where the user can see which car is output. Space wise this was also
the best way to do it since we need a new car object for each car entered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
CarTracker.java - implementation explanation of source file

This was the main menu and user choices structure file. This involved
a main which first initializes a priority queue that I made (explained
later) and then reads in cars.txt file. It adds all the cars in the file
to the priority queue. Then the main menu loops until exiting. Each option
presented is as written in the assignment. Some options ask for further 
user input such as for make and model, or for which update option the user
desires. 
One thing to note is that it will call the lookup() function in order to
see if the VIN number entered by a user correlates to an existing car.
This function is O(log n) by using the tree map get() function, further
explained in the next section. It will continue running if the car exists,
or will get a null return value, and tell the user the car they looked up
doesn't exist. Then will take back to the main menu.
Overall, it puts all the work into the priority queue file.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
IndexMinPQ.java - implementation explanation of source file

I chose to edit the book code given since it fit well with utilizing a 
min heap, and making it indexable. In the end I kept some basic functions,
such as isEmpty(), and major ones such as swim(), sink(), greater(), and 
exch(). I edited them a bit to include a toggle function, either operating
for price or mileage depending on what was being requested.
These were used throughout the functions I wrote. It saved me time
when writing this project to focus on other aspects of implementation.
Each are run time of O(log n) worst case as written in the book code.
Further edits were done to work with make/model, such as accepting a 
parameter of the current size of the heap instead of the entire car size.
This is further explained in the make/model section.

For the indirection table I chose to use tree map. The benefits included
its self-balancing, which would have keys sorted ascending.
Tree Map stores as (key, value) pairs where keys are organized ascending
and repeat keys replace previous ones. Values can be anything.
The insert delete and search for a red black tree (used by tree map) are 
all O(log n) for average and worst case, fitting into the project 
directions. Get, containsKey, put, remove functions of Tree map are thus
also O(log n). These functions were used throughout to ensure best run
times. Run times were researched and confirmed by java documentation.

Other possibilities considered included Hash Map, ArrayList, but those 
required worst case get and put function run times of O(n) which would not
fit into the requirements. Tree Map guarantees O(log n). And thus was the
best bet.
Since space was not as big a concern, I used multiple tree maps to ensure
the best run time possible.
Space for each tree depends only on the number of cars entered. Since it
will keep adding as long as a new car comes in. 
The heaps used store Car object per index. For all cars, the indexPrice &
indexMileage trees store (VIN, index in heap) for each car.

The following are the thoughts behind the functions in IndexMinPQ.
Note that the first half explains everything for all cars.
The additions to each function for make/model cars will be explained at
the end.

0 The variables
n - the number of all cars entered
pqPrice - heap for all car prices, lowest price car is at first index
pqMileage - heap for all car miles, lowest mileage car is at first index
indexPrice - tree map for all car prices, saves VIN number and index of 
the car in pqPrice
indexMileage - tree map for all car prices, saves VIN number and index of
the car in pqMileage

1 Insert car
For all cars, I have the size counter n that updates (since a car is now
being added). A check whether or not the heap is full is done along with
resize if needed (doubles size of array and copies its old contents). This
is not very time efficient, so I chose to start with a large array (255)
which will not require a resize right away. To copy each car in the array
is O(n). Space wise it is not too large, in case there is not a need to
look up so many cars, so why have all the unnecessary empty slots. It will
really depend on the specific case if this program was used in a real life
setting. In any case, each insert will insert the current car into the 
index corresponding to the current total number of cars.
After that, the two tree maps for indexing mileage and price are also
updated, with the current car VIN number and index stored in the heap
for use in updating and removing. This is O(log n) as stated in the java
documentation of tree map put function.
The swim function is used to swim the car value of either mileage or price
so that the lowest will always be at index 1 in the heap. This swapping is
O(log n) for the swim function as discussed in the book code. 

2 Update car
To update the car, I passed in the parameters for which value to update
so the method knows which one to change. For example, something will have
a value 0 or greater for price if price is to be changed, with the other
alternatives mileage and color set to -1 and "" respectively. 
I can directly access the car desired to update by looking up its VIN.
This is the tree map get() function which is O(log n).

Ex update color.
This is so if a car is returned, it won't matter if we looked up
lowest price or mileage, they will both be updated with the new color.
Again, it will be in O(log n) to get the VIN number, O(1) to set the 
color. 
Same logic goes for updating mileage and price. You just would need to 
swim/sink for updating whichever value was pertinent. That is, re sort of
the heap if mileage was updated, since this may displace it's current
position. 
The combination of swim and sink for resorting the heap is due to not 
knowing where the car will end up in comparison to other cars. Using each
is 2 * O(log n) which is O(log n).
Then just update the mileage in the price heap without concern
of the rearrangement, since only order of prices matter in that heap.

3 Remove car
To remove a car, I first check if we are empty, that is size n is 0. Exit
with a message if that is true.
Next is the actual implementation. First I change all the mileage parts.
I do a get() to get the VIN number of the car we want to delete, so I can
access the right car in the mileage heap as well as the tree map. 
Deleting from the heap takes more work. To ensure best run times, the best
way was to use the exchange function to swap the position of this car with
the very last car in the mileage heap. That way I can simply set the last
position in the heap to null, which is O(1). Then, use swim/sink functions
to re sort the heap, without the car to be removed. Last, do a remove(), a
run time of O(log n) from the tree map. 
The same thing is done for the removal from price heap and price tree map.

4/5 Get minimum price/mileage of all cars
This was simple to implement. I return the first index of either heap,
depending on whether mileage or price is looked up. Since the sorting of
the heap was done already when each car is inserted, this is an O(1) get
by returning the car at the first index.

6/7 Get minimum price/mileage based on Make/Model of car (very long)
After some time, I found the best way to implement this step was to have
multiple tree maps which do the same things in a more specific way than
before. The main tree maps for price and mileage now save the make/model
of the car, and a unique heap for this make/model. Accessing this unique
heap which is sorted when a car is added, can return the lowest car for
the desired value of the specific make/model at its first index. 
Another tree pair is a counter which holds the make/model pair as well as
how many cars are in this pair. This way when removing I can see if I need
to get rid of this category car.
A third tree map pair holds the VIN and index value in the relevant unique
heap for the car. All these tree maps together enable specific lookup and
tracking of cars while staying in O(log n) runtime. The main concern is
space, which will add up just because the trees will have to expand as
different pairs of make/model cars are added. The benefit is that the tree
map will update each time to the unique make/model, so at least there is
only one heap per make/model. In summary, I put the importance of run time
first, and so have more space requirements.
 
Addition to variables:
tP - stores make/model, and heap for all cars of this make/model sorted
by price
tM - stores make/model, and heap for all cars of this make/model sorted
by mileage
extraP - stores VIN of car, and index of the car in its unique heap of
its make/model sorted by price
extraM - stores VIN of car, and index of the car in its unique heap of
its make/model sorted by mileage
countMMP - stores make/model, and count of how many cars of this make/
model there are. used during reference to car prices
countMMM - stores make/model, and count of how many cars of this make/
model there are. used during reference to car mileages

Addition to insert:
The addition to insert followed the same logic as all cars. I put in a 
different function swapCheck just to make it easier for me to edit.
It reads in the toggle for either mileage/price update, and uses the
respective trees for this choice. It checks with the containsKey function,
O(log n) if the car of this make/model is added for the first time.
If so, it makes a new heap for this make/model pair. It adds the car to
the first index of the heap, O(1). It uses put O(log n) to put the car
in each tree (3 of them) with the desired values as explained above.
If it already has this make/model pair, then update of the old heap is
desired. I extract the old heap using the get function, O(log n), and use
a counter increment for this new car. This can now update the counter tree
by the put function. And swim is called next to bring the lowest value,
price or mileage, to the top of the heap. Swim, sink, exchange, were all
edited in order for the program to work with make/model. Swim takes in the
number of cars in the current heap, the toggle for price or mileage, the
heap itself, and the VIN tree so it can update the indexes if swaps occur.
After the heap is updated, the main tree tP or tM is updated by putting
the new heap into the current car make/model. Thus replacing the old one.

Addition to update:
For this section, again the similar logic to all cars was used. I used the
same pattern as before, except now I have to look up which make/model is
currently being updated (this car). From that I get the heap, which I can
swim/sink as before (using same get tree map function). I passed in a new
parameter to sink, as now I wanted only for the number of cars in the now
smaller make/model heap (int len). Then after the heap updates, I replace
the old heap with the new in the main tree tP/tM. 
I update the opposite tree (ex. tP when mileage is updated) in order to 
ensure that everything prints out according to the updates. This is done
in the same way, just without the sinking and swimming since no comparison
is needed.
Color follows the same logic.

Addition to remove:
The addition to remove again mirrored the logic of all cars. I used a if
check on my counter functions, since if the counter for this make/model is
non existant that means I ran out of this make/model pair. I do the same
pattern of get functions to find the heap I want. If this heap count is
currently 1, that means I'm about to delete the last one. So I don't have
to worry about sink/swim, I just remove the make/model directly from each
tree which is O(log n). Otherwise there is more than 1 car for this make/
model in this current iteration, so I need to resort the heap. This is 
done with the same exchange as before, followed by swim/sink an reset of
the trees through put functions. 

Finally, the function 6/7 itself.
I simply look up the make/model in the main tree, get the heap, and then
return the first index of that heap. It just required going one level 
deeper, which was all set up by the new tree map pattern for this section.
Run times are again O(log n) since I use the get function.


